---
layout: post
title:  "Chebyshev polynomial (First kind)"
date:   2015-01-19 17:00:00
first-language: En
second-language: Fr
subdomain: fr 
activate-lan: yes
categories: post
---

We start the year 2015 with a nice topic in polynomials, in this case let's talk about <b>Chebyshev Polynomial</b>, only we take the first kind, we left the Second kind for another opportunity. So, which is it?

<b>Definition</b>
---

Chebyshev polynomials are polynomials with the largest possible leading coefficient, with the condition that their absolute value in the interval $$[-1, 1]$$ is bounded by $$1$$. The chebyshev polynomial of the first kind are defined by the recurrence relation. <br>

$$T_{0}(x) = 1 $$ <br> $$T_{1}(x) = x $$ <br> $$T_{n+1}(x) = 2xT_{n}(x) - T_{n-1}(x)$$

These are characterized by the property:

$$
T_{n}(\cos{\theta}) = \cos{(n\theta)}
$$

We can raise the following question

<b>Prove that for each $$n \in \mathbb{N}$$ there is a polynomial $$T_{n}$$ with integer coefficients and the leading $$2^{n-1}$$ such that $$T_{n}(\cos{x}) = \cos{nx}$$ for all $$x$$</b>

<b>Solution</b>

We know that $$T_{0}(x)=1$$ and $$T_{1}(x)=x$$. For $$n>1$$ we use induction on $$n$$. 

Since $$\cos{(n+1)}x = 2\cos{x}\cos{(nx)} - \cos{(n-1)}x$$, we can define $$T_{n+1} = 2T_{1}T_{n} - T_{n-1}$$ Since $$T_{1}T_{n}$$ and $$T_{n-1}$$ are of degrees $$n+1$$ and $$n-1$$ respectively, $$T_{n+1}$$ is of degree $$n+1$$ and has the leading coefficient $$2\times2^{n} = 2^{n+1}$$. It also follows from the construction that all its coefficients are integers.

Actually, these sequence of orthogonal polynomials are related to <b>De Moivre's formula</b>

<b>De Moivre's Theorem</b>
---

For any complex number $$x$$ and any integer $$n$$.

$$
(\cos{x} + i\sin{x})^{n} = \cos{(nx)} + i\sin{(nx)}
$$

<b>Proof:</b>

We prove this formula by induction on $$n$$ and by applying the trigonometric sum and product formulas. We first consider the non-negative integers. The base case $$n=0$$ is clearly true. For the induction step, observe that:

$$
(\cos{n} + i\sin{x})^{k+1} = (\cos{x} + i\sin{x})^{k} \times (\cos{x} + i\sin{x}) \\ 
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ = (\cos{kx} + i\sin{kx})(\cos{x} + i\sin{x}) \\ 
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \  \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ = \cos{kx}\cos{x} - \sin{kx}\sin{x} + i[\sin{kx}\cos{x} + \cos{kx}\sin{x}] \\ 
\  \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \  \ \ = \cos{[(k+1)x]} + i\sin{[(k+1)x]} \\
$$

Here we have a problem about chebyshev polynomial:

<b>Prove that the maximum in absolute value of any monic real polynomial of $$n$$-th degree on $$[-1, 1]$$ is not less than $$\frac{1}{2^{n-1}}$$</b>

<b>Solution</b>


Note that equality holds for a multiple of the n-th Chebyshev polynomial $$T_{n}(X)$$
The leading coefficient of $$T_{n}$$ equals $$2^{n-1}$$, so $$C_{n}(X) = \frac{1}{2^{n-1}}T_{n}(X)$$ is a monic polynomial and

$$
|T_{n}(X)| = \frac{1}{2^{n-1}}|\cos{(n\arccos{x}})| \leq \frac{1}{2^{n-1}} \ \ \ \ za \ \ x \in [-1,1]
$$

Moreover the values of $$T_{n}$$ at points $$1, \cos{\frac{\pi}{n}}, \cos{\frac{2\pi}{n}}, \dots ,  \cos{\frac{(n-1)\pi}{n}}, -1$$ are alternately $$\frac{1}{2^{n-1}}$$ and $$-\frac{1}{2^{n-1}}$$

Now suppose that $$P \neq T_{n}$$ is a monic polynomial such that $$ \max_{-1\leq x \leq 1} |P(x)| < \frac{1}{2^{n-1}}$$ 
Then $$P(X)-C_{n}(X)$$ at points $$1, \cos{\frac{\pi}{n}},  \dots ,  \cos{\frac{(n-1)\pi}{n}}, -1$$ alternately takes positive and negative values. Therefore the polynomial $$P-C_{n}$$ has at least $$n$$ zeros, namely, at least one is very interval between two adjacent points. However, $$P-C_{n}$$ is a polynomial of degree $$n-1$$ as the monomial $$x^n$$ is canceled, so we have arrived at a contradiction.

By the way, I would like to know other solutions for the last one, so [I asked on MathStackExchange][MES]. If you want share something with me, please send me a message.

Now, we describe a theorem generated by the Chebyshev polynomials.

<b>Chebyshev's theorem</b>
---

For fixed $$n\geq1$$, the polynomial $$2^{-n+1}T_{n}(x)$$ is the unique monic $$n$$th-degree polynomial satisfying

$$
\max_{-1 \leq x \leq 1} {|2^{-n+1}T(x)|}\leq \max_{-1 \leq x \leq 1}{|P(x)|},
$$

for any other monic $$n$$th-degree polynomial $$P(x)$$. Let's see an example.

<b>Let $$A_{1}, A_{2}, \dots, A_{n}$$ be points in the plane. Prove that on any segment of length $$l$$
there is a point $$M$$ such that</b> 

$$
MA_{1}.MA_{2} \dots MA_{n} \geq 2 \left( \frac{1}{4} \right)^n
$$

<b>Solution</b>

We can assume that $$l=2$$. Associate complex coordinates to points in such a way that the segment coincides
with the interval $$[-1, 1]$$. Then

$$
MA_{1}.MA_{2} \dots MA_{n} = |z-z_1||z-z_2| \dots |z-z_n| = |P(z)|,
$$

where $$P(z)$$ is a monic polynomial with complex coefficients, and $$z \in [-1, 1]$$. 

We can write $$P(z) = R(z) + iQ(z)$$, where $$R(z)$$ is the real part and $$Q(z)$$ is the imaginary part
of the polynomial. Since $$z$$ is real, we have $$|P(z)| \geq |R(z)|$$. The polynomial $$R(z)$$ is monic,
so on the interval [-1, 1] it varies away from zero at least as much as the Chebyshev polynomial. Thus
we can find $$z$$ in this interval such that $$|R(z)| \geq \frac{1}{2^{n-1}}$$. This implies $$|P(z)| \geq 2\frac{1}{2^n}$$, and rescaling back we deduce the existence in the general case of a point $$M$$ satisfying the inequality from the statement.

Stepping aside from the classical picture, let us also consider the families of polynomials $$T_{n}(x)$$ defined by $$T_{0}(x) = 2, T_{1}(x) = x, T_{n+1}(x) = xT_{n}(x) - T_{n-1}(x)$$. It's determined by the equality:

$$
T_{n}\left( z + \frac{1}{z} \right) = z^n + \frac{1}{z^n}
$$

Also, I suggest visit the amazing answer for:

<b>Let $$a_{i} \in \mathbb{R} (i=1, 2, \dots, n)$$ and $$f(x) = \sum_{i=0}^{n}a_{i}x^{i}$$ such that if $$ |x| \leq 1$$, then $$|f(x)| \leq 1 $$</b> 
on [MathStackExchange][MES2]


                           

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>

function typeset() {
  MathJax.Hub.Queue(["Typeset",MathJax.Hub]);
};

var disqus_config = function () {
  this.page.url = 'http://localhost:4000/post/2015/01/19/Chebyshev-polynomial-first-kind/';
  this.page.identifier = '/post/2015/01/19/Chebyshev-polynomial-first-kind/';
  this.page.title = 'Chebyshev polynomial (First Kind)';
  this.callbacks.onNewComment = [typeset];
  this.callbacks.onInit = [typeset];
};

(function() {  
 var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');

 s.src = '//joelantonio.disqus.com/embed.js';

 s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
 (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
 })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript" rel="nofollow">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
<script id="dsq-count-scr" src="//joelantonio.disqus.com/count.js" async></script>



[MES]: http://math.stackexchange.com/q/1105882/161851
[MES2]: http://math.stackexchange.com/a/532170/161851
