---
layout: post
title:  "Smith Normal Form as the best group presentation"
date:   2016-06-02 15:30:00
first-language: En
second-language: Fr
subdomain: fr 
activate-lan: yes
categories: post
---

$$
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand{\ZZ}{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand{\FF}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\coker}[1]{\text{coker} \ #1}
\newcommand{\im}[1]{\text{Im} \ #1}
\newcommand{\diag}[1]{\text{diag}(#1)}
$$

Days ago, I asked on Math.StackExchange the question:
[Describe, as a direct sum of cyclic groups, the cokernel of the map: $$\phi: \mathbb{Z}^{3} \longrightarrow \mathbb{Z}^{3}$$][question], where after
some hints and understand modules over PID ([see handouts][progress]), I finally got an answer. However, the answer suggests me to use
[Smith Normal Form (SNF)][SNF], so I decided to understand: <b>What does SNF truly represent?</b>, so let's start with a basic definition.

<b>Definition:</b> Let $$R$$ be a ring. Every left $$R$$-module $$M$$ is a quotient of a free left $$R$$-module $$N$$ such that $$M$$ is finitely generated
if and only if $$N$$ can be chosen to be finitely generated.

We need to remember that the rank of any free $$R$$-module is uniquely determined, later this will be important in our deductions, now let's see 
what a group presentation is.

<b>Group presentation</b>
---

<b>Definition:</b> Let $$I$$ be a set and $$S$$ a subset of the free group $$F(I)$$ such that $$F(I)$$ is generated by $$I$$. Indeed, a group
presentation defines the quotient group of the free group $$F(I)$$ by the normal subgroup generated by $$S$$

Now, let's suppose we would like to get <b>the best presentation</b> of a given module $$M$$, this is possible thanks to the SNF, which gives
the answer for a finitely generated $$M[X]$$-modules, to see this, let's see how SNF builds this approach.

Let $$\phi: R^{n} \longrightarrow R^{m}$$ be a $$R$$-map of commutative ring $$R$$, where $$R^{n}$$ and $$R^{m}$$ are free $$R$$-modules.
Let $$Y = \{y_{1}, \dots, y_{n}\}, Z = \{z_{1}, \dots, z_{m}\}$$ be the basis of $$R^{n}$$ and $$R^{m}$$, respectively. We build a matrix
$${}_{Z}[\phi]_{Y}$$, called the <b>presentation matrix</b>, over $$R$$ such that

$$
M = \phi(y_{i}) = \sum_{j=1}^{m} a_{ji}z_{j},
$$

where $$M \cong \coker{\phi} = R^{m}/ \im{\phi}$$.

<b>Lemma:</b> Let an exact sequence of $$K[X]$$-modules

$$
0 \longrightarrow K[X]^{m} \xrightarrow{\quad \phi \quad} K[X]^{m} \xrightarrow{\quad \varphi \quad} V^{M} \longrightarrow 0,
$$

where $$V$$ is a $$m$$-dimensional vector space over a field $$K$$, then its matrix presentation is $$XI - M$$ with respect to $$E$$, where $$E$$
is the standard basis.

<b><i>Proof:</i></b> For $${}_{E}[\phi]_{E}$$ we write $$\phi(e_̣{i})$$ in terms of $$E$$, then

$$
\phi(e_{i}) = xe_{i} - Me_{i} 
$$ 

$$
\hspace{4em} = xe_{i} - \sum_{j} a_{ji}e_{j}
$$ 

$$
\hspace{6.5em} = \sum_{j} x\delta_{ij}e_{j} - \sum_{j} a_{ji}e_{j}
$$ 

$$
\hspace{4.5em} = \sum_{j} (x\delta_{ij} - a_{ji})e_{j}
$$

where $$\delta_{ij}$$ is the [Kronecker delta][kronecker]. Indeed, the presentation matrix $${}_{E}[\phi]_{E} = xI - M$$. Now, let's recall what SNF says us.

<b>Smith Normal Form</b>
---

Every nonzero $$x \times m$$ matrix $$\Gamma$$ with entries in a Euclidean ring $$R$$, which is equivalent to a matrix of the form

$$
\left[\begin{matrix}
\sum & 0 \\
0 & 0
\end{matrix}\right],
$$

where $$\sum = \diag{\sigma_{1}, \dots, \sigma_{q}}$$ and $$ \sigma_{1} \vert \dots \vert \sigma_{q} $$ are nonzero, such matrix is called the 
SNF of $$\Gamma$$. 

Now that we have how the presentation matrix is involved with the bases, we can do the conntection between them.

<b>Definition: </b> Let $$R$$ be a euclidean ring and let $$\Gamma$$ be the $$n \times m$$ presentation matrix associated to an $$R$$-map
$$\phi: R^{n} \longrightarrow R^{m}$$, relative to some choice of bases, and let $$M = \coker{\phi}$$.

<b>Theorem: </b> If $$\Gamma$$ is $$R$$-equivalent to a SNF $$\diag{\sigma_{1}, \dots, \sigma_{q}} \oplus 0$$, then those $$\sigma_{1}, \dots, \sigma_{1}$$
that are not units are the invariant factors of $$M$$.

<b><i>Proof: </i></b> Suppose that $$\diag{\sigma_{1}, \dots, \sigma_{q}} \oplus 0$$ is in fact the SNF of $$\Gamma$$, then the bases of
$$y_{1}, \dots, y_{n}$$ of $$R^{n}$$ and $$z_{1}, \dots, z_{m}$$ of $$R^{m}$$ with $$\phi(y_{1}) = \sigma_{1}z_{1}, \dots, \phi(y_{q}) = \sigma_{q}z_{q}$$
and $$\phi(y_{j}) = 0$$ for all $$y_{j} > q$$, if any. We see that $$R/(0) \cong R$$ and $$R/(u) \cong \{0\}$$ if $$u$$ is a unit. If $$\sigma_{s}$$ is the
first $$\sigma_{i}$$ that is not a unit, then

$$
M \cong R^{m-q} \oplus \frac{R}{\sigma_{s}} \oplus \dots \oplus \frac{R}{\sigma_{q}},
$$

a direct sum of cyclic modules for which $$\sigma_{s} \vert \dots \vert \sigma_{q}$$. Indeed $$\sigma_{s}, \dots, \sigma_{q}$$ are the invariant factors
of $$M$$.

The proof of the theorem clears why is necessary to get the SNF for answering to the question that I posted on Math.StackExchange

<b>PS: </b> Most of the ideas posted here were obtained of the book Advanced Modern Algebra Third Edition, Part 1 by Joseph J. Rotman, especially the proof of the theorem.

[question]: http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1797112/describe-as-a-direct-sum-of-cyclic-groups-given-a-map-phi-mathbbz3-l
[progress]: http://joelantonio.me/handouts/
[SNF]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smith_normal_form
[kronecker]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kronecker_delta
