---
layout: post
title:  "Zeta function for Schottky groups"
date:   2016-06-17 05:10:00
first-language: En
second-language: Fr
subdomain: fr 
activate-lan: yes
categories: post
---

$$
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand{\ZZ}{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand{\CC}{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand{\FF}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbb{P}}
\newcommand{\HH}{\mathbb{H}}
\newcommand{\psl}[2]{\text{PSL}(#1, #2)}
\newcommand{\coker}[1]{\text{coker} \ #1}
\newcommand{\im}[1]{\text{Im} \ #1}
\newcommand{\diag}[1]{\text{diag}(#1)}
$$

To see many ideas that are not here, please read the [paper][paper1] published by D. Borthwick. <b>The intention to this post is not to add anything new neither
prove anything else, but only to present new things about resonances on hyperbolic surfaces. Maybe I've not beginning with something very basic, however, I'm planing
to do a kind a state of art about these topics in the future.</b>

<b>Schottky group</b>
---
Roughly speaking, a Schottky group is a particular kind of a [Fuchsian group][Fuchsian] with the following construction.

Let $$\{D_{i}\}$$ be a set of disks such that exists a [transformation][Mobius] $$S_{i} \in \psl{2}{\RR}$$ that sends $$\partial D_{i}$$ to
$$\partial D_{i+r}$$, in this way, maps the exterior of $$D_{i}$$ to the interior of $$D_{i+r}$$, where $$i$$ is defined cyclically, this means

$$
S_{i+r} = S_{i}^{-1} \hspace{1em} \text{and} \hspace{1em} S_{i+2r} = S_{i}
$$

A Schottky group $$\Gamma$$ is generated by the corresponding $$S_{i}$$'s. The domain for the action of $$\Gamma$$ is $$\HH - \cup D_{i}$$ since
each transformation $$S_{i}$$ is hyperbolic in the sense that it's repelling a point inside $$D_{i}$$ and attracting a point inside $$D_{i+r}$$.

Futhermore, if we take the closures of the disks are mutually disjoints means that $$X \cong \Gamma \backslash \HH$$ has infinite area with no cusps, so
$$\Gamma$$ is convex cocompact.

<b>Selberg Zeta Function</b>
---
It's analogous to the Riemann zeta function, described as

$$
\zeta_{\Gamma}(s) = \prod_{p} \frac{1}{1 - N(p)^{-s}},
$$

where $$p$$ run all over the prime congruent class and $$N(p)$$ is the norm of congruent class $$p$$.

<b>Transfer operation</b>
---
There is a linear operator $$f: X \longrightarrow X$$ for a set $$X$$. We define the transfer operation as an operator $$\mathfrak{L}$$
such that

$$
(\mathfrak{L}\phi)(x) = \sum_{y \in f^{-1}(x)} g(y)\phi(y),
$$

where $$\mathfrak{L}$$ is acting on the space of functions $$\{\phi: X \longrightarrow \CC \}$$ and $$g: X \longrightarrow \CC$$ is an auxiliary valuation function.

<b>Zeta function for Schottky groups</b>
---
In the paper [Distribution of resonances for hyperbolic surfaces][paper1] by D. Borthwick, there is a full section dedicated to this. Let $$B$$ be a map
such that $$B: U \longrightarrow \CC \cup \{\infty\}$$ where $$U = \bigcup_{j=1}^{2r} D_{j}$$ is the union of the disks. The tranfer operator, acting
over the Hilbert space $$\mathcal{H}(U)$$ and define

$$
(\mathfrak{L}(s)\phi)(z) = \sum_{w \in U: Bw = z} B'(w)^{-s}\phi(w).
$$

And then thanks to that, we can use it to write the Selberg zeta function as a determinant for all $$s \in \CC$$

$$
Z_{X}(s) = \text{det}(I - \mathfrak{L}(s)).
$$

[Fuchsian]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuchsian_group
[Mobius]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C3%B6bius_transformation
[paper1]: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1305.4850v2.pdf
